- Does it help to say sorry?
- When I accidentally harm another person, it's almost inconceivable that I'll let it pass without acknowledging my responsibility. Formally, a legitimate apology seems to require a) owning responsibility, by saying what I did to cause harm; b) recognition of the impact upon the person to whom I owe an apology; and ideally, c) a commitment to repair that, either immediately or when a similar situation recurs in the future.
- “Even a dog knows the difference between being kicked and being stumbled over.” Oliver Wendell Holmes
- Infamously, the non-apology apology takes the form of "I'm sorry that YOUR action made X bad." The other gets the blame, either for misinterpretation, over-reaction, or somehow making faultless behavior __seem__ misfortunate.
- While apologies play an essential role in lubricating social intercourse, there are interpersonal situations where they cause more harm. Some people may be serial apologizers, the most notorious being Harvey Weinstein's custom of blowing up and then sending flowers to paper over the damage. 
- There's other occasions where apologies may only make things worse. If the emotional damage is difficult for the victim to acknowledge publicly, then finding an artful way to repair the harm may not entail directly and explicitly verbalizing an apology.
- In my work with tech firms, scale collides with the vagaries of technical bugs, enough that disappointment's inevitable at least some of the time. 
- So what should a company do when a customer suffers some breakdown in the brand promise? The gut feeling, by analogy with our interpersonal dynamics, suggests that some form an apology is owed.
- Let's get concrete. Transportation and delivery companies must quote a prediction, even though the vicissitudes of the physical world are vulnerable to unforeseen problems. Ride-hailing apps choose a granularity and degree of accuracy to surface. 
    - Uber & Lyft show a point estimate for when the car will arrive; for carpooling, variability was implied by showing a time range. This was bounded by two probabilities - the lower estimate is hit 50% of the time ("p50"), while the upper bound was expected to cover 95% of driver arrivals ("p95"). As a homework problem for experienced riders, what intuitive probability do you expect to be shown when you hail a ride? In other words, how frequently do you find that a car arrives later than the quoted arrival time?
- Five percent of customers are, by definition, going to get an experience that's worse than the best 95% of cases. 
    - Bounding the variance can keep the frequency of a truly bad event to a smaller fraction of the population, but how many companies deliver the mythical 5 nines uptime?https://searchnetworking.techtarget.com/feature/The-Holy-Grail-of-five-nines-reliability
    - Twitter's first years involved a lot of fail whale moments, enough so that it became part of the expected user experience. "some of our users feel very connected to it" https://www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2015/01/the-story-behind-twitters-fail-whale/384313/
- How should a company manage the worst outcomes? Does an acknowledgement help repair the harm done? Should the firm spiff the customer something valuable to offset the letdown? What if they explicitly promise to do better, or perhaps tell the customer specifically how they intend to "learn from" the mistake?
- Since each of these steps leverage elements of an effective interpersonal apology, many companies have incorporated them in some fashion. As a matter of empirical record, there's enough data on these trials to support a very specific apology strategy. In a nutshell, the strategy that experiments recommend is: Don't bother.
- Let's unpack this, since it runs counter to what's best for maintaining good interpersonal relationships. The first and most important thing to recognize is that interactions with a brand differ in important dimensions from person-to-person contact.
    - In human relationships, one's reputational value stakes some skin in the game. Even for one-time interactions (such as tipping at an airport you'll never visit again), our self-image can be undermined if we see ourselves as too selfish to care about social norms toward others.
    - The invisible hand that brought the customer and company together hinges on self-interest. 
    - Even though the transactional nature is not nakedly broadcast, there's moments where the experience will reveal that the business exchange involves efficiency rather than intimacy.
    - The motivation of potential profit drives a company to deliver value, yet it's implausible that such a connection should be mistaken for friendship.
    - Interactions with a company create expectations that aren't attached to a single recognizable face or individual. Even when a CEO becomes as famous as a rock star (e.g., Steve Jobs or Elon Musk), customers interact with their products rather than with that leader.
    - Economists call apologies offered without further backing 'cheap talk."
        - Both parties realize that 'cheap talk' is an option, some companies try to back up their commitment with something of tangible value. "On time or free" was once used to push pizza-deliveries, but even Domino's seems to no longer commit to that
    - Different Uber teams have at tried to roll out refunds, hoping to repair a defect with an apology.
To back up the “cheap talk,” Uber teams have tried out $1 to $5 refunds for late rides. Net return on apology treatment is often quite negative. The main impact of a refund appears to be heightened memorability of the bad experience.
    - Intuitively, cultural norms strongly suggest that when something goes wrong, acknowledging the defect contributes to repair a relationship.
    - Explicit apologies are reputed to help doctors reduce their malpractice risk.
        - Medical apologies direct attention toward error "An apology may alert the patient to malpractice she would not otherwise have discovered." (“Sorry” Is Never Enough, 2019, Stanford Law Review) https://www.stanfordlawreview.org/print/article/sorry-is-never-enough/
    - There is very little evidence that apologies result in a repaired relationship.
    - Intuitions (based on interpersonal experience) are so strong that many Uber teams simply assume that “all the previous apologies were not correctly phrased/delivered/explained”
        - Repeated experiments (internal & external to Uber) demonstrate there may be no magic wording that significantly outperforms silence.
    - Uber should NOT be spending resources to apologize.
