- AMZN Writing Task (Max 2 hours)
    - Challenge: 5 distinct BUs faced existential threat to payments income stream. Billions in opportunity. 
    - Problem in part traced to legacy 1st-to-market (akin to the Blackberry), which was losing market share to Square's iPhone revolution.
    - Opportunity: Bring comprehensive, design-centered strategic vision. 
    - Obstacles: Each of the 5 BUs wanted 1/3 of the potential upside
    - Early on, discovered duplicative BCG-style strategy team was independently developing a payments strategy
    - Key GM (for Quickbooks) was a Cheshire cat, always unavailable to even the other C-level executive meetings
    - My role: Sole UXR, on a team with one other Design Strategist and added liaison to strategy group, plus 3 IDEO designers
    - Business question: How can a diverse set of BUs align on to a synergistic vision
    - Research design: Bring methodological rigor over 3 months of exploration. First 2-3 weeks were DEO-inspired probes with extreme edge cases, sampling an opportunistic network of niche hipsters. 
    - First contribution: In 3rd week, scheduled & ran Paper prototype interactions in Sacramento Central Valley with 10 (small businesses)
    - Enrolled in 3 day payments bootcamp to deepen domain expertise, shared out with full team.
    - 2d month: Designed script and scheduled interviews in the heartland. Difficult conversation took field trip in St Louis, requiring IDEO cancel dream of Aspen trip to embed in a designer's family bike shop. Set up 2-3 hour observational field interviews with 8 SMBs (range of service-oriented, inventory intensive, professional health practice, construction, small factory)
    - Led synthesis workshops with full team to extract key insights in preparation for mid-project share out. Collaborated with IDEO designers to craft gallery of 8 foot foam core boards. 
    - Quant Experiment: Host online prototypes. Heatmaps tracked interaction understandability. MaxDiff assessed least and most important functionality. Factor analysis of preferences shaped personas. Relative appeal of different variants narrowed consideration set. 
    - 3rd Month: Deck with quotes, brief video clips and presentation of insights shared within Design Innovation Group and key stakeholders. 
    - Final shareout: IDEO delivered gorgeous presentation - foam core boards, tiny movies, lusciously expensive book of recipes.
    - Impacts: 
        - Transformed executive POV on payments' power as an attractive, non-transactional personalized expression of relationships
        - Invoice tools directly incorporated in cloud migration of accounting, contributing to $62MM revenue lift, winning over absent GM by alliances with PM team
        - Payments streamlined sign up with smart defaults that generated $2MM
- **Paul Sas, Research Project Description for Amazon 02/23/2021**
- **__  __**I’d like to describe one project where I learned a lot about setting strategy through research. My objective was to **map the payments landscape for 5 distinct business units**. The company faced an existential threat. Their product had been first-to-market with a Mobile point of sale device. By analogy, they looked like Blackberry, when Square had just revolutionized retail payments with an iPhone-level solution.
- **  The opportunity** offered a huge upside __if__ __we built a coherent, design-centered strategy.__ Small business banking, accounting, payroll, and taxes used separate payment channels. Five BUs each wanted ~1/3 of potential profits, undermining any coherent plan. In my second week as the company’s Behavioral Economist, our CEO summoned all his General Managers. Design had been explicitly invited to the board room table. Our task was to humanize the future of payments over the next 3 months.
- **  My role on the team**: I was the __sole researcher__ alongside an internal Design Strategist plus 3 IDEO designers. We eventually connected with the internal strategy group, to form a core X-team of 5 + 1 liaison. __My job was to bring methodological rigor__ to answer **our business question**: How might key insights enable diverse business units to align on a shared payment strategy?
- **  My research design**: I’d never collaborated before with such a storied design agency. For the first 2 weeks, I developed domain expertise while observing their method of searching out extreme users. Sampling draws on an opportunistic network of interesting niches. __By the third week, I began more systematic explorations to complement their cool-hunting__. I scheduled & facilitated paper prototype sessions with 10 representative small business owners in the Central Valley. I also enrolled in a multi-day payments boot camp. This greatly deepened my knowledge base. I then shared the intricacies of payment pipes with our full team.
-  As they prepped the gallery walk,__ I designed a quantitative survey/experiment in Qualtrics.__ A panel of 500 small business owners used online versions of prototypes, now in beta. __Heatmaps__ revealed where people first clicked to perform tasks. __Max diff questions__ assessed least and most important attributes. __A principal component analysis__ identified key dimensions (e.g., marketing channels, repeat business, reputation). __ I then used a factor analysis to pull out patterns for personas__. I presented results in a deck, first to the Design Group, and then to key stakeholders. For our final deliverables, the agency grew the team temporarily to 10 designers. Life-size foam core boards conveyed qualitative & quantitative insights. Tiny movies showed our personas using the tools. The pièce de résistance was a takeaway cookbook. Functioning as a souvenir, this ensured that our ideas persisted long after the meeting.
- **  Business Impacts**: Most immediately, this__ successfully transformed executives' world view__. The Chief Product Officer said, “I’d never seen before that prosaic transactions could be beautiful.” Every product team adopted our approach. Formerly transactional payments were now seen as personalized expressions of relationships.
-  When accounting prepared to migrate to the cloud, their product adopted several invoice features. Launched the next year, this __helped lift revenues by $62MM__. Later, our partnership streamlined payment sign-up. Smart behavioral defaults resulted in an __incremental $2MM/year in premium enrollment,__ with no impact on drop-offs.
- __ The design research methodologies explored here have informed all of my subsequent research projects.__
