- Today demands absolute rigor ignoring the doom scroll ball scratch. I spent ayer [[November 3rd, 2020]] in Tracy, at Hawkins Elementary & Bohn, to observe the polls. I probably caught the only incident. WeChat lit up a bit to remark on an orange t-shirt at Bohn. Around 1, I drive over, and there were 4 cop cars with cherries flashing. Orange t-shirt said "Bearded & Ugly" with machine guns festooning the text. The dude looked solid, lots of tattoos, and he was calmly telling 2 of the cops about the nuisance surveillance of a guy on the other side of the parking lot, with a white t. Mr Orange was within his rights, standing well off beyond the 100 ft mark, and as far as I could presume, he was just watching the polls. His buddy orbited, in a black t-shirt, lanky and peripherally monitoring the sitch. I video'd. Then, after, he asked his buddy for a water, and I went and gave him the only bottle that I gave away that day. I thanked him for doing his duty. Also, when a cop came over to ask what I was video'ing, I replied that Election Defense was a non-partisan group observing to make sure the laws were fairly enforced. Also, he already had this in hand, and I thanked him for his service.
- Mr Orange, when the cops left, arranged to slip out and have his black friend take over. Mr Black T-shirt was more suspicious, and when I said we all wanted fair elections, he snorted "I wish!" Both guys were at least slightly paranoid, but neither felt threatening. The monitor of the monitor (Mr White) seemed to be more under the law's suspicion. Mr Black was driving a pickup with an American & a Black Flag (the Black & White). Since the pickup was across the street, it was perfectly legal. The flags didn't flare w/o wind, so the Tramp name wasn't visible anyway.
- Elisabeth Kashner pulled me into this, and she later came up around 3.
- I stayed at Bohn until 7ish, w/o anything else of note. 
- Got to talk to Allan Collins, seeking the long-view. I repeated the JSB - Stu Card convo: "Stu, do you read books?" He & Muffy writing on self-regulation, to fight digital addiction. 
- Explained EA to Allan, and told him how late I was to getting my time managed by (even daily) goals.
- Also called Allison, tried to reach Eric Reiner, Gideon, Stevie, Feathers, not yet Shari, Rehan, DPA, Philip, Mark Wright. Did Zoom a few with Sherm & He Jung and their son Jacob and daughter who's a HS junior. No spoilers please!
- The election is, as most expected, un-resolved. Spare me the histrionic hand wringing nail biting fretsome finger crossing. They'll let me know when it's over. I don't believe BH will lose, but they didn't kill it like I'd hoped. 
- FEND in public: Since Tracy isn't 100% masked (p95 though), there was a non-zero risk of being infected. I regularly irrigated my nose, and wondered how it protects my throat. There was no way I was going to offer to share, even though there's never bodily contact. FEND will need to develop disposable vape bags. Given that there's been no response from Penny, I am going to just explore lower tech but behavioral salient means. Go around to restaurants with posters and pods. 
- I broke smobriety at the end of the day, hit BPG by 8;45. I'd also taken 15 mg amphetamine around 9am, so I wouldn't be hungry at the site. 
- Biked up colusa toward El Cerrito, and entered a crematorium grave yard. Brought a scooter, but abandoned it to explore the gnolls and heather where all the bones were plugged. Experimented with a flashlight as illumination for gravestones. No really hilarious names, tons of people seemed to die in the mid-1940s, which made me believe the cemetery was expanded down the hill around then. The most ostentatious was the Witter Boulder, and the patriarch, Dean, gathered around the tombs of many foreparents and kids. 
- Today is an open canvas. Two things done after entering the cemetery: At the summit, I tried drawing the 2 conic bottle of Fend, struggling to get perspective of the top and bottom shaped representatively. Surfed the urge to open the HD Coffee Chip, but also sketched the empty carton within the hour.
- When  I returned home at 1pm, I watched Khan Academy explain 
- p(FairCoin | Heads) = (p(Heads | FairCoin) x p(Heads) ) / p(FairCoin)
- Tree: 50% FC, 50% UFC, 4 daughters. H & T ; H & H
- Of the 4 outcomes, 3 are H. Proportion of H from FC is 1/3 
- Iterate: FC generates HH & HT ; UFC generates HH & HH & HH & HH
- Out of 6 outcomes, 5 are H; only 1 of those 5 is from FC. Confidence is now 1/5 
- HHH & HHT ; HHHH 8 times; Confidence now 1/9 
