- {{[[TODO]]}} 2 focusmate sessions
    - 11:15
    - {{[[TODO]]}} 2:30 MOVE to 2pm
- {{[[TODO]]}} work on Guidedtrack using Loom
- {{[[TODO]]}} Check in with Lynette at 3
- {{[[DONE]]}} Bike to Vine top
- {{[[TODO]]}} Figure out why listing [[pitches]] is avoided
- {{[[TODO]]}} apply to top 3 jobs on tabs
- {{[[TODO]]}} water garden at break
- {{[[TODO]]}} Publish [[Apologies]] eod
- {{[[TODO]]}} [[Surf the urge]] but 
    - don't read news until 5pm
    - Ration twitter to once before 3pm
    - avoid feedly until same time
    - Check email only 3x[[October 5th, 2020]]
- [[journal]][[October 9th, 2020]]
    - Not optimal to write on a keyboard when I wake, but here I am, tempted to digitize my first brain by the allure of the second. Evokes the image of a scifi writer Marvin Minsky talked about, who had connected his keyboard to his PC via an extension phone cord, so that the guy could sit on his balcony, 50 feet from his monitor, typing away without visual input.
        - Maybe I should resurrect a bluetooth keyboard? My typing is so erratic, but it'd still outperform the voide to text
    - Today I'll meet with EA coach, Lynette, and there's definitely been enough boost in productivity to earn her the $150/week
    - Last night, the Anger Men convened, and Jonathan had informed the group in advance that he was leaving. I'd spoken to him ahead of this, and didn't do anything to dissuade him. Still, listening to his rationale, that he wanted to invest in real social connections, and that the discontinuity of people joining and leaving, made it sound like he was giving up something that was OK for an option that had nothing definite about replacing this. By the end of the 90 minutes, he'd decided to keep on, so not persuading him was persuasive enough. There's another guy, Pete Dapkus, who is quitting. His engagement is so tepid, his walled-up life so bleak, his apologizing for forgetting to come reads so like a porky-pig stammer, that it's sad for him, but no real loss. His two kids are so remote, so psychologically wounded, so stuck in defiant disorders, that it makes me afraid. I definitely don't dwell aloud on how much love the boys still show me, since it would sound as awkward as bragging about spa treatments to someone in prison.
    - We have been a very amiable family. At dinner last night, I asked them all what grade to give myself for the last week. 4 out of 5... Y reminded me that Sat morning, I crossed a line with trying to get help raising the sukkah. My impatience, my intolerance with their lassitude, my expectation that they'd contribute my concpet of the minimal tithe of labor, all of these swarmed into a bee sting of hostility and anger. I raised my voice enough that Miryam & B just left, after M stated that I needed to take an hour cool down. 
        - That scarcely helped, although it probably did check any impulse to raise the intensity. Before they'd left, I'd become so irate that, while Y lazed on the trampoline, I went on & bounced him around with my jumping weight, while yelling that he just needed to give me two minutes.
        - Once they left, I bethought the approach, and instead of raising my voice to accelerate the process, switched to dilating the verbiage until Y relented. I just spoke, unangrily, aloud all of my thoughts, refraining from sarcasm or irk, but streaming the ideas that underpinned my expectation. They're 13, and the contribution I wanted to have them make was small. I couldn't complete the rest of the work without some help holding the wall up until I'd screwed in supporting screws. Blah blah, as Y tried to block me out and just lie on the trampoline, I kept talking, unrelenting, but without any expectation that it would work quickly. Of course, he told me to shut up, and then I would incorporate that into the stream of words that explained why I was not going to shut up.
        - He then tried to escape into the house, but I playfully, but not wet-noodily, prevented him from getting past me. I know that it can sound like violence, but it didn't feel that way to me. I just spent energy as if I was guarding him on the bball court, so that he couldn't run away and leave me all alone. 
        - Eventually, he did assent, and in a very short time, the sukkah walls were self-supporting, and I thanked him. 
        - I then proceeded to put in every single screw by myself, as I contemplated my place in the kingdom. I knew that I had blown the experience once Miryam boycotted, but I also did demonstrate how trivial the ask had been, and now that I was unblocked, I proceeded to raise the entire sukkah myself. 
    - Musical beds is still a major neurosis here. When the kids are going down, a built-in cycle is saying goodnight, regulating their battle over whether Y gets to cuddle to sleep with B or not, then turning off the lights. A couple of minutes later, B will come out to get a glass of water, and he'll tell me I should go to bed soon. There might be one more revenant visitation in the next 20 minutes, so I should know by now to not start any illicit ice cream consumption until after that phase cycle completes.
        - Now that I know this, it struck me last night that I can ease into this rhythm, or I can use all my energies to try to shove it into a smaller cramped tempo.
        - The boys are very affectionate as they go down, so why accelerate past this hour? B gives tons of hugs, and he expresses genuine curiosity about how I'm doing. Y's affections are primarily directed to his big brother, but also overflowing to include me. Mir is always the center of his heart, and he usu starts lobbying to go straight up to our bed, once it sounds like B isn't going to let him sleep together in the bottom twin bunk.
        - Their mattresses are absurdly small for 2 growing boys. Y's top bunk scarcely gets any usage, and Mir & I both feel that they should experiment with de-bunking them, to lay them in parallel on the ground. I also believe it'd be an improvement to find wider beds, even though B is past the point 
