- [[journal]] Yesterday had 2 productive phone calls - First, with Gusto.com, the conversation was open, honest, focused, and very interesting. They are doing payroll for SMBs 1-50 employees, and their approach to the interview itself was high quality. 
- I also spoke with Penny Finnie, formerly the founder of the chocolate cafe Bittersweet, and now the marketing force behind Fend, an aerosolizing device to mist your nasal passages with Calcium Chloride
- In the evening, I also got Ricardo on the horn. I let him know that some of the words I spoke seemed too harsh, but he said they were right to get his attention. When he asked if I could give Mir his email, so that she could get him info about grad school, I begged off. First, I said, find one grad student who says they're happy, since it's so infantilizing, and once you're finished, you're exactly where you were before you started. He laughingly recalled that both his friends who did go to grad school were miserable.
    - Of course, he's not moving with any great speed right now, but it'd be an error for me to express impatience. I'm reading Jocko Willink's Extreme Ownership just now, and for all its martial intensity, the term owner is what I'd like Ricardo to adopt
    - {{[[TODO]]}} I told him I'd look for references if he would be willing to consider hiring a coach 
- Our neighbor Petra just knocked on the door to borrow the pulse oximeter; her wife Alice was in an ambulance the other day, and now that she's home, they want to track her oxygen level. I bought this way back in March
- The attitudes toward Covid risk are plateauing, and since I now would advocate for re-opening the public schools, it's apparent that I'm viewing our social response these days as an over-reaction. 
- I spent at least 90 minutes on R yesterday. It bumped off doing any writing, but it is my A1. I should persist at 60 minutes a day, until I can actually do the sorts of things I need to do in it. I answered a few questions in the forum, helpfully pointing to clarifications to fix the outdated syllabus.
- 
