- **Key messages** Lancet on Particle Size in 2020
    - https://www.thelancet.com/journals/lanres/article/PIIS2213-2600(20)30323-4/fulltext.  Published:July 24, 2020
    - Infectious aerosols are particles with potentially pathogenic viruses, bacteria, and fungi suspended in the air, which are subject to the same physical laws as other airborne particulate matter. The biology of the pathogens predicts their airborne survival, infectivity, virulence, and other characteristics.
    - Particle size is the most important determinant of aerosol behaviour
    - Small aerosol particles smaller than 5 μm in aerodynamic size are most likely to remain airborne for indefinite periods (unless there is removal due to air currents or dilution ventilation), and to be deposited in the lower respiratory tract
    - Infection control guidelines have stated that most respiratory infections are transmitted by respiratory droplets—ie, particles larger than 5–10 μm in size. Airborne transmission has been attributed to only a few pathogens, notably __Mycobacterium tuberculosis__, via infectious droplet nuclei that are particles sized 5 μm or smaller. The use of airborne infection isolation rooms and respirator masks has been recommended only to protect against airborne transmission.
    - These recommendations have been based on old data and inferences. Over the past two decades, investigators have collected and directly measured the particle sizes of infectious aerosols emitted from individuals with respiratory infections from aerosols generated by cough and from exhaled breath.
    - The studies reviewed in this paper consistently show that humans produce infectious aerosols in a wide range of particle sizes, but pathogens predominate in small particles (<5 μm that are immediately respirable by exposed individuals
    - Data are accumulating that severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), the virus that causes COVID-19, is transmitted by both small and large particle aerosols.
    - Filtering facepiece respirators offer more respiratory protection than surgical masks, and powered air purifying respirator (PAPRs) hoods offer the best protection for most health-care settings.
    - Face shields can help decrease exposures to and contamination from large particle aerosols, but they do not offer inhalation protection against small particle aerosols
    - PAPRs have built-in eye protection. Surgical masks and other respirators require a face shield or goggles to protect the eyes to prevent infection
    - Masking of patients can help to partly reduce infectious aerosol exposures to health-care workers, but are not a substitute for physical distancing and other infection control measures.
    - Aerosolisation of respiratory pathogens is highly variable, at least partly due to the log-normal distribution of infectious aerosols, consistent with so-called super-spreading.
    - Airborne infection isolation rooms and other infection control measures against airborne infection are indicated for virulent respiratory pathogens such as SARS-CoV-2.
- An evidence review of face masks against COVID-19 https://www.pnas.org/content/118/4/e2014564118
- Tests at home
    - Vacuum pull through
    - Blow out a candle?
    - Incense burning or cigarette 
    - Scent of a solvent
- Particulate Filter Efficiency Testing
- The maximum and minimum penetration value will be reported for the set of 10 respirators. If valves are
present on the respirator, they will be sealed for testing. Each respirator will be tested on a TSI 8130 and/or
8130A Automated Filter Tester, set to the following parameters:
- 6|Page
- While some of the test parameters listed are consistent with NIOSH Standard Test Procedure TEB-APR-STP-0059
(STP-0059), this modified test is different. Respirators assessed to this modified test plan do not meet the
requirements of STP-0059, and therefore cannot be considered equivalent to N95 respirators that were tested
to STP-0059. The values reported are only to provide an indication of filter efficiency and are not a confirmation
that the product conforms with the requirements of the certification mark. This assessment provides useful
information about the filter efficiency of respirators that may be used by healthcare workers in national
emergency situations.
