- Author:: [[Jose Baez]]
- Full Title:: Unnecessary Roughness
- Category:: #books
- ### Highlights first synced by #Readwise [[November 23rd, 2020]]
    - first time I saw hope in Aaron’s eyes, followed by those famous words he uttered when we first decided to go on this journey together: “Fuck yeah!” 17. INDEPENDENT AND NOT SO INDEPENDENT WITNESSES The prosecution began its case by putting on families of the victims to do what Massachusetts law calls “humanizing the proceedings.” I have never been a fan of this. What they do is start the trial by calling a tearful family member to testify and entering into evidence a photograph of the victim. The trial begins with an obvious effort to pull the heartstrings and emotions of the jury. Before you go thinking that I’m cold, look at it from this perspective: the law has a theory, which is that the jury should base its decision on the evidence, not on emotion. I cannot agree more with this concept. We do not want jurors making decisions based on emotion. I believe this concept took root in the 1960s, when criminal justice reform was enacted after a series of miscarriages of justice during the civil rights era. Dispensing justice based on emotion was another form of lynching. You aren’t taking someone out of their cell and hanging them in front of the courthouse. But what you are doing is putting them on trial, making the jury angry about this horrible crime, and then pointing the finger at the accused. Someone must pay for this horrible crime. Recent case law has trended away from this line of thinking, and for good reason. Think about it this way: you have a prosecutor putting family members on the stand to evoke sympathy from the jury, yet at the end of the trial you have the judge instructing the jury that they are to base their decision on facts, not feelings. After the victims’ families took the stand and offered little information about who could have committed this crime, the prosecution shifted focus to the crime scene. We all spent the next two weeks listening to each and every officer on the stand confirm ([Location 2467](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B0796S3BWM&location=2467))
    - I had stated the obvious, that I needed all the ([Location 3325](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B0796S3BWM&location=3325))
