- [October 12th, 2020](<October 12th, 2020.md>) published https://medium.com/@hormetic/should-companies-say-sorry-just-keep-getting-better-dont-bother-ddfc6097acae
    - draft https://docs.google.com/document/d/1WBosUqqCllSE4AHvmzluVoKhvDTYgdtJioVgXiBqmlg/edit
- When we accidentally harm another person, it’s difficult to let it pass without acknowledging responsibility. A legitimate apology owns the responsibility, by seeing what I did to harm someone. This explains the inadequacy of a __non-apology__ apology: “I’m sorry you made X worse than I intended.” One must also recognize the impact upon the other person. Ideally, the apologizer commits to repair the damage, either immediately or when a similar situation recurs.
- Repairing one’s self-image is one motivating factor, and healthy self-regard serves may spur reflection and public admission of responsibility. In other situations, an apology may only make things worse. The person to whom an apology is owed isn’t obligated to let you communicate it to them. Serial apologizers, such as the pariah Harvey Weinstein, make a habit of miserable behavior that precedes sending a gift or flowers to paper over the damage.
- **Should companies behave like people?**
- What should a company do when their brand promise breaks down? The analogy with interpersonal dynamics intuitively suggests that the firm should issue an apology. Every firm’s guaranteed to let down some customers.
- Let’s get concrete. Companies often quote a predicted level of service. Transportation and delivery apps surface when the car or meal is expected to arrive. Uber & Lyft show the time when you will arrive at your destination (with a point estimate like “6:32 pm”). To capture greater variability, they may provide a time range (6:32 to 6:48pm). The two times sample a probabilistic prediction, where the lower estimate might cover 50% of the cases (let’s call it the “p50”). The choice for the upper range balances quantitative precision against marketing conversion rates. Let’s assume that the worst-case cover 95% of all rides (“p95”). As a homework problem, what percent of the time do you believe the arrival exceeds your quoted time? While the distance between the best and the worst may not be noticeably great, five percent of customers will by necessity experience service worse than the best 95%.
- **Does an acknowledgment help repair the harm done?**
- How might a company handle these letdowns? What if a firm explicitly promises to do better? Should the firm spiff the customer something valuable to show their seriousness? Perhaps they specifically promise to “learn from” the mistake?
- As a matter of empirical record, data to date suggests a very specific approach to apologizing. In a nutshell, the strategy validates by multiple experiments is: __Don’t bother.__
- Let’s unpack this, since it runs counter to what’s best for maintaining good interpersonal relationships. Interactions with a company significantly differ from person-to-person contact.
- The invisible hand that brought the customer and company together hinges on self-interest.
- The motivation of potential profit drives a company to deliver value, yet it’s implausible that such a connection should be mistaken for a personal relationship.
- The transactional nature of business is not nakedly broadcast, yet the experience still reveals that the business exchange involves efficiency rather than intimacy. For explorations of this awkward fact, consult this economist’s [love letter to big business](https://www.amazon.com/dp/B07D2B8MLT/ref=dp-kindle-redirect?_encoding=UTF8&btkr=1).
- Economists view apologies as ‘cheap talk,” mere words without any further backing.
- Facebook has historically leaned into apologies like a drunkard who will not drive a car unless equipped with airbags. Serial apologizer Mark Zuckerberg is, precisely because of his repetitive contrition, a serial privacy violator.
- Several economists at one ride-share company ran a[ large scale field experiment](http://fieldexperiments-papers2.s3.amazonaws.com/papers/00644.pdf) to research the impact of an apology on having a late ride. One of the researchers had previously found that apologies required more than words. To back up what might just be “cheap talk,” the rideshare company gave $5 refunds for late rides (> p95). An apology aims to establish that the bad experience was truly exceptional. __Baby, from now on, I’m going to be good.__
- The experiment found that the net return for issuing an apology was negligible. In cases where they apologized more than once, the results were worse than never having said sorry. By contrast, sending $5 without mentioning the bad ride was just as effective over the long term as issuing an apology backed up by the $5.
- When I’ve mentioned this counter-intuitive result, many people react by assuming that the right wording must’ve been missing from the test. Perhaps the tested apologies were not correctly phrased/delivered/explained?Consider the 3 types of apologies (with and without $5) used in the field experiment:
- “Oh no! Your trip took longer than we estimated.” (Basic apology)
- “We know our estimate was off.” (Status apology)
- “We’re working hard to give you arrival times that you can count on.” (Commitment apology)
- The study, alas, found ‘no statistically significant differences between different message types.’ If the wording really matters, current research hasn’t found the magical formula. The fact that 3 very different rationales don’t differ implies that wording doesn’t shift the balance here.
- Even a methodologically sound, well-powered experiment won’t compel a person to abandon their intuitions. Consider how [the historically earliest data analysis based on clinical evidence](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1383766/) was interpreted. A French doctor wanted to know whether bloodletting improved health. When the data was tabulated, it demonstrated worse outcomes for those who had been bled. Paradoxically, the doctor interpreted this as implying __they had not done enough bleeding__.
- Uber formerly employed a team of trained PhDs as their [Behavioral Lab](https://eng.uber.com/applied-behavioral-science-at-scale/). The team’s publications leveraged the academic literature (with decks that supposedly actually had footnotes). What made their approach cutting edge was the active application of research, since they generated product-focused recommendations based on published studies.
- When I brought up this rather famous study with someone who was consulting at Uber, they reported that one social scientist in the Lab still recommended using an apology since it “felt like the right thing to do.”This advice sounded like Uber should double-down on the blood-letting.
- Results from an (anonymized) meal delivery experiment [were shared at a 2019 economics conference](http://www.sjdm.org/presentations/2019-Talk-Jenkins-Mason-apology-encoding-services.pdf). Apologizing apparently made everything worse: Satisfaction, trust, and the likelihood of using the service all significantly decreased after getting an apology. I’ve also heard that a large health care provider tried hand-delivering flowers to recognize inferior service, and the outcome was again worse than saying nothing at all. Apparently, in businesses, this phenomenon is called “Breaking into Jail”, when a firm manages to direct explicit attention to a mistake they’ve made.
- One final source of evidence can be found from studies of medical malpractice. Based on early anecdotal evidence, apologies were thought to be quite effective at reducing malpractice. The insurance industry successfully lobbied to make laws more conducive to saying sorry. A doctor’s apology could not be used as evidence in court, with the hope that more open admissions of human error would reduce costly litigation. Empirical data showed the reverse: “An apology may alert the patient to malpractice she would not otherwise have discovered.” ([“Sorry” Is Never Enough, 2019, Stanford Law Review](https://www.stanfordlawreview.org/print/article/sorry-is-never-enough/))
- What do I recommend to clients when they see their own firms’ failing? I remind them how little evidence supports the hope that apologies result in a repaired relationship. Rather than invest resources in calling out past mistakes, I believe it’s far more effective to invest in improved service going forward. An explicit acknowledgment may only make the product manager feel better. But an apology that’s motivated by a desire to repair one’s own self-conception is really no apology at all.
- **Should companies say sorry?  Don’t bother, just keep getting better**
- When we accidentally harm another person, it's difficult to let it pass without acknowledging responsibility. A legitimate apology owns the responsibility, by seeing what I did to harm someone. This explains the inadequacy of a __non-apology__ apology: "I'm sorry you made X worse than I intended." One must also recognize the impact upon the other person. Ideally, the apologizer commits to repair the damage, either immediately or when a similar situation recurs.
- Repairing one's self-image is one motivating factor, and healthy self-regard serves may spur reflection and public admission of responsibility. In other situations, an apology may only make things worse.  The person to whom an apology is owed isn’t obligated to let you communicate it to them. Serial apologizers, such as the pariah Harvey Weinstein, make a habit of miserable behavior that precedes sending a gift or flowers to paper over the damage.
- **Should companies behave like people?**
- What should a company do when their brand promise breaks down? The analogy with interpersonal dynamics intuitively suggests that the firm should issue an apology. Every firm’s guaranteed to let down some customers.
- Let's get concrete.  Companies often quote a predicted level of service. Transportation and delivery apps surface when the car or meal is expected to arrive. Uber & Lyft show the time when you will arrive at your destination (with a point estimate like “6:32 pm”). To capture greater variability, they may provide a time range (6:32 to 6:48pm). The two times sample a probabilistic prediction, where the lower estimate might cover 50% of the cases (let’s call it the "p50"). The choice for the upper range balances quantitative precision against marketing conversion rates. Let’s assume that the worst-case cover 95% of all rides ("p95"). As a homework problem, what percent of the time do you believe the arrival exceeds your quoted time?  While the distance between the best and the worst may not be noticeably great, five percent of customers will by necessity experience service worse than the best 95%.
- **Does an acknowledgment help repair the harm done? **
- How might a company handle these letdowns? What if a firm explicitly promises to do better? Should the firm spiff the customer something valuable to show their seriousness? Perhaps they specifically promise to "learn from" the mistake?
- As a matter of empirical record, data to date suggests a very specific approach to apologizing. In a nutshell, the strategy validates by multiple experiments is: __Don't bother.__
- Let's unpack this, since it runs counter to what's best for maintaining good interpersonal relationships. Interactions with a company significantly differ from person-to-person contact.
- The invisible hand that brought the customer and company together hinges on self-interest.
- The motivation of potential profit drives a company to deliver value, yet it's implausible that such a connection should be mistaken for a personal relationship.
- The transactional nature of business is not nakedly broadcast, yet the experience still reveals that the business exchange involves efficiency rather than intimacy. For explorations of this reality, consult one economist’s [love letter to big business](https://www.amazon.com/dp/B07D2B8MLT/ref=dp-kindle-redirect?_encoding=UTF8&btkr=1).
- Economists view apologies as 'cheap talk," mere words without any further backing.
- Facebook has historically leaned into apologies like a drunkard who will not drive a car unless equipped with airbags. Serial apologizer Mark Zuckerberg is, precisely because of his repetitive contrition, a serial privacy violator.
- Several economists at one ride-share company ran a[ large scale field experiment](http://fieldexperiments-papers2.s3.amazonaws.com/papers/00644.pdf) to research the impact of an apology on having a late ride. One of the researchers had previously found that apologies required more than words. To back up what might just be “cheap talk,” the ride share company gave $5 refunds for late rides (> p95). An apology aims to establish that the bad experience was truly exceptional. __Baby, from now on, I’m going to be good.__
- The experiment found that the net return for issuing an apology was negligible. In cases where they apologized more than once, the results were worse than never having said sorry. By contrast, sending $5 without mentioning the bad ride was just as effective over the long term as issuing an apology backed up by the $5.
- When I’ve mentioned this counter-intuitive result, many people react by assuming that the right wording must’ve been missing from the test. Consider the 3 types of apologies (with and without $5) the field experiment used:
- “Oh no! Your trip took longer than we estimated.” (Basic apology)
- “We know our estimate was off.” (Status apology)
- “We’re working hard to give you arrival times that you can count on.” (Commitment apology)
- The study found 'no statistically significant differences between different message types'
- Even a methodologically sound, well-powered experiment can’t compel a person to abandon their intuitions. Consider the interpretation from[ the historically earliest data analysis based on clinical evidence](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1383766/). A French doctor wanted to know whether blood letting improved health outcomes. The data demonstrated worse outcomes for those who had been bled. Paradoxically, the doctor interpreted this as implying they had not done enough bleeding.
- Uber once had a team of trained PhDs to staff their [Behavioral Lab](https://eng.uber.com/applied-behavioral-science-at-scale/).Their publications leveraged the academic literature (with decks that actually had footnotes). Their cutting edge approach actively applied the research, as they generated product-focused recommendations.
- A consultant from 2019 explained to me that even though I was myself aware of the 2018 study drawn upon millions of Uber's own riders, one scientist in the Lab still recommended using an apology as it “feels like the right thing to do” to acknowledge the mistake. According to this consultant, it sounded like advice that Uber double-down on the blood-letting.
- I myself attended a conference last year where [results were shared from a meal delivery company experiment](about:blank). Apologizing apparently made everything worse: Satisfaction, trust, and the likelihood of using the service all significantly decreased after getting an apology. I’ve also heard stories of a large health care provider that tried hand-delivering flowers to recognize inferior service, and the outcome was again worse than saying nothing at all. Apparently, in businesses, "Breaking into Jail" is a term for calling explicit attention to a mistake you've made.
- One further source of evidence can be found in the medical profession. Apologies were once thought to be so effective at reducing malpractice, that the insurance industry successfully lobbied to make the law more conducive to saying sorry. A doctor's apology could not be used as evidence in court, and the hope was that doctor's more open admission would reduce costly litigation. Empirical data showed the reverse: "An apology may alert the patient to malpractice she would not otherwise have discovered." ([“Sorry” Is Never Enough, 2019, Stanford Law Review](https://www.stanfordlawreview.org/print/article/sorry-is-never-enough/))
- What do I recommend to my clients when they’re upset at their own firms’ failures? I remind them how little evidence supports the hope that apologies result in a repaired relationship. Rather than invest resources in calling out mistakes of the past, it’s far more effective to invest in improved service going forward. The explicit acknowledgment may only make the product manager feel better about the inferior experience. And an apology that’s motivated by a desire to repair one’s own self-conception is really no apology at all.
- Should companies bother to say sorry? 
    - No. Just keep getting better
- Interpersonal norms / [Politeness Theory](<Politeness Theory.md>)
    - When I accidentally harm another person, it's almost inconceivable that I'll let it pass without acknowledging my responsibility. Formally, a legitimate apology seems to require a) owning responsibility, by saying what I did to cause harm; b) recognition of the impact upon the person to whom I owe an apology; and ideally, c) a commitment to repair that, either immediately or when a similar situation recurs in the future.
    - “Even a dog knows the difference between being kicked and being stumbled over.” Oliver Wendell Holmes
    - The non-apology apology takes the form of "I'm sorry that YOUR action made X worse than I intended." The blame sticks to you, either for misinterpretation, over-reaction, or making my faultless behavior __seem__ hurtful.
    - While apologies play an essential role in society, there are interpersonal situations where they only add damage. Serial apologizers, such as the notorious Harvey Weinstein, may habitually treat people miserably and then send flowers to paper over the damage. 
        - Even if all the boxes of a legitimate apology get checked, an apology may be undermined by selfishness.
        - Repairing one's self-image, rather than assuaging the damage done to the other, is one factor in any apology. Self-regard can be a healthy motive when it spurs reflection and public admission of responsibility. Responsibility is not truly owned if an apology seeks primarily to whitewash one's reputation.
    - Apologies may in some cases only make things worse. If the emotional damage is awkward or difficult for the victim to acknowledge, that argues against explicit verbalization.
        - Owing another person an apology does not create an obligation for the other to allow you to communicate it to them.
        - Restorative justice?
- **Should companies behave like people?**
- What should a company do when a breakdown in the brand promise causes some misfortune to a customer? The analogy with interpersonal dynamics intuitively suggests that some form an apology is owed. Cultural norms require acknowledging the harm as a step to repairing a relationship.
- Tech firms's scale generates inevitable software bugs. The logic of minimally viable products means disappointments occur for some portion of the captured market
- Let's get concrete. 
    - Transportation and delivery companies must quote a prediction, even though the vicissitudes of the physical world are vulnerable to unforeseen problems. Ride-hailing apps choose a granularity and degree of accuracy to surface. 
        - Uber & Lyft show a point estimate for when the car will arrive; for carpooling, variability was implied by showing a time range. This was bounded by two probabilities - the lower estimate is hit 50% of the time ("p50"), while the upper bound was expected to cover 95% of driver arrivals ("p95"). As a homework problem for those who've repeat experience, what probability do you intuit when you hail a ride? In other words, how frequently do you expect that a car arrives later than the quoted arrival time?
    - Five percent of customers are, by definition, going to get an experience that's worse than the best 95% of cases. 
        - Bounding the variance can keep the frequency of a truly bad event to a smaller fraction of the population, but how many companies deliver the mythical 5 nines uptime?https://searchnetworking.techtarget.com/feature/The-Holy-Grail-of-five-nines-reliability
- Twitter's first years involved a lot of fail whale moments, enough so that it became part of the expected user experience. "some of our users feel very connected to it" https://www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2015/01/the-story-behind-twitters-fail-whale/384313/
- Does an acknowledgement help repair the harm done? 
- What if a firm explicitly promise to do better, or perhaps tell the customer specifically how they intend to "learn from" the mistake?
- Should the firm spiff the customer something valuable to offset the letdown? 
- As a matter of empirical record, there's enough data on these trials to support a very specific apology strategy. In a nutshell, the strategy that multiple experiments recommend is: Don't bother.
- Let's unpack this, since it runs counter to what's best for maintaining good interpersonal relationships. The first and most important thing to recognize is that interactions with a brand differ in important dimensions from person-to-person contact.
    - In human relationships, one's reputational value inherently has skin in the game. 
        - Even for one-time interactions (such as tipping at an airport you'll never visit again), our self-image can be undermined if we see ourselves as too selfish to care about social norms toward others.
        - [ ] Loewenstein's lab on this 
    - The invisible hand that brought the customer and company together hinges on self-interest. 
    - The motivation of potential profit drives a company to deliver value, yet it's implausible that such a connection should be mistaken for friendship.
    - Interactions with a company create expectations that aren't attached to a single recognizable face or individual. Even when a CEO is a rock star (e.g., Steve Jobs or Elon Musk), customers interact with their products rather than with that leader.
    - The transactional nature of business is not nakedly broadcast. At some points, the experience will reveal that the business exchange involves efficiency rather than intimacy. qv Tyler Cowen https://www.amazon.com/dp/B07D2B8MLT/ref=dp-kindle-redirect?_encoding=UTF8&btkr=1
    - Economists call apologies offered without further backing 'cheap talk."
        - Both parties may realize that 'cheap talk' is an option, some companies try to back up their commitment with something of tangible value. 
        - "On time or free" may push pizza-deliveries, but even Domino's seems to no longer commit to that.
        - The cheapest apologies seem to waft from serial privacy abuser Mark Zuckerberg https://www.cnbc.com/2018/12/19/facebook-ceo-mark-zuckerberg-privacy-apologies.html 
            - Facebook's corporate apologies mirror Weinstein's interpersonal shenanigans. Trotted out so frequently, the company's reckless behavior leans into them as a drunkard might insist on only driving cars with airbags. 
            - Harrods, the premier luxury retailer in London, once had a full-time employee whose sole responsibility was to be sacked to appease particularly irate customers. https://henrytapper.com/2010/01/09/an-employee-whose-job-was-to-be-sacked/ 
    - Different Uber teams experimented with methods that might repair a late ride with an apology. (John List 2017)
        - An economist views firms as signaling their level of quality. Customers rationally incorporate any previous evidence to predict where to satisfy their preference.
            - To back up “cheap talk,” Uber teams gave $5 refunds for late rides. 
            - The objective of an apology is to show that the bad experience was truly exceptional. Somehow, the pattern of reliability broke, but baby, from now onwards, we're going to be good.
            - Theexperiment found that in some cases sending an apology is worse than sending nothing at all. That was particularly true after more than one apology. Net return on apology treatment was negative.
            - The impact of a refund may include heightened memorability of the bad experience.
            - Since the result is counter-intuitive, the typical first time response to this finding is to assume that apologies per se just need some special wording that was presumed to be missing from the conditions tested. In addition to the group that received "No apology", there were 3 types of apologies tried on different groups:
                - Basic apology: e.g., “Oh no! Your trip took longer than we estimated.”
                - Status apology: e.g., “We know our estimate was off.”
                - Commitment apology: e.g., “We’re working hard to give you arrival times that you can count on.”
                - The experiment found 'no statistically significant differences between the different message types'
            - The study was methodologically sound, well-powered by many 100s of thousands of rides in each cell. Data cannot compel abandoning one's intuitions, so long as they're just made more elaborate.
                - One of the first attempts at evidence based data analysis evaluated whether blood letting improved health outcomes. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1383766/
                - The data demonstrated worse outcomes for those who had been bled
                - Nevertheless, the failure to generate better recovery inspired the recommendation to do MORE bleeding.
            - Before mass layoffs in 2019, Uber had a "Behavioral Lab", staffed with a team of trained PhDs. They scrupulous referencing the literature (their decks had footnotes), and actively made product-focused recommendations based on their training. 
                - https://eng.uber.com/applied-behavioral-science-at-scale/
            - Even though a previous study used millions of Uber's own rides 2 years earlier, it was amazing to me to read the following (lightly paraphrased): [After citing the 2018 study]: However, in this case, it feels like the right thing to do to acknowledge where me made a mistake... Potential extensions to an pology could be tested - would providing an excuse or attribution to something like traffic change riders' perceptions? Should we apologize ahead of time when we know we're going to be late." 
            - In a nutshell, this researcher recommended Uber double-down on the blood-letting.
    - One of the meal deliverers (GrubHub, Doordash, et al) apparently made everything worse by sending apologies.
        - Satisfaction, trust, and the likelihood of using the service again were all significantly worse after having received 
        - www.sjdm.org/presentations/2019-Talk-Jenkins-Mason-apology-encoding-services.pdf
    - "Breaking into Jail" is jargon for calling explicit attention to a mistake you've made
        - Disclosures are required in SEC prospectuses, but only the most acute analysts seem to attend to the risks they mention.
        - Being pre-emptive, rather than following a specific experience, they're no match for the confirmation bias of excited investors. 
            - Public admissions of being paid by an interested party have negligible impact on evaluation of a journal article (Ariely)
    - Explicit apologies by medical professionals were thought to reduce malpractice suits, so much that insurance industry successfully lobbied to change the law. A medical professional's apology could not be used as evidence in court, and the hope was that doctor's would then be free to admit to making mistakes without costly litigation. 
        - Extensive empirical data showed that medical apologies only serve to direct attention toward error. "An apology may alert the patient to malpractice she would not otherwise have discovered." (“Sorry” Is Never Enough, 2019, Stanford Law Review) https://www.stanfordlawreview.org/print/article/sorry-is-never-enough/
    - There is very little evidence that apologies result in a repaired relationship.
    - Intuitions (based on interpersonal experience) are so strong that many Uber teams simply assume that “all the previous apologies were not correctly phrased/delivered/explained”
        - Repeated experiments (internal & external to Uber) demonstrate there may be no magic wording that significantly outperforms silence
        - An economist believed that it should be interpreted as merely an 'insurance policy.' This sophisticated reframing was later found to be quite rare amongst the recipients.
    - I feel sorry for Robin Hanson after I read his apology: http://mason.gmu.edu/~rhanson/JuneteenthApology.html
    - Dan Harmon's [MeToo](<MeToo.md>) mea culpa https://web.archive.org/web/20180112085651/https://slate.com/arts/2018/01/dan-harmon-apologizes-to-community-writer-megan-ganz-on-harmontown.html

# Backlinks
## [October 6th, 2020](<October 6th, 2020.md>)
- [ ] Topic today - [Apologies](<Apologies.md>)

## [October 7th, 2020](<October 7th, 2020.md>)
- [ ] Topic today - [Apologies](<Apologies.md>)

## [October 8th, 2020](<October 8th, 2020.md>)
- [ ] Publish [Apologies](<Apologies.md>)

## [October 9th, 2020](<October 9th, 2020.md>)
- [ ] Publish [Apologies](<Apologies.md>)

