- building on "[Topics for blogs](<Topics for blogs.md>)"
- It's pretty clear that I've been an intellectual fame-ball throughout my career, so I can cop to this at the outset. Since the dawn of the commercial internet (synch'd with Mozilla's launch in 1994), I've been a bystander to the SiliValley Renaissance. Prior to moving to California, perhaps after breaking a mirror in the midWest, I spent 7 years in and around Cambridge.
- The clear symptom of my status hunger isn't even the name dripping. It's not even how urgently I craved meeting all these academics and artists. More privately, I knew my place was to play the subordinate suck up, beta to omega in the presence of these big shots. The thrill of proximity mirrored my intense compulsion to pepper the air with a good student question (ooh, ooh, Mr Kotter) https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ju-lptJweTc
    - One of my grad professors (best left anonymized Lee Ross) so blatantly exhibited this drive to hijack talks that I could see it in myself, initially as the shadow revulsion, and then reflectively, in the way annoyance signals self-similarity. In every talk, I had to jump to the mike, though many likely had quite similar variations on the question I had to voice.
- Living near Harvard & MIT gave me an opportunity to wander into talks to gawk at the people you read about in books. My workdays were always spent in rather marginal jobs, waiting tables, clocking in at a factory, or printing camera-ready digital print outs. 
- I designed my work life to maximize the freedom to pursue my own curiosity. One surprising fact of the academy is that gate-keepers only care about guarding access to credentials. If you're benighted enough to think that learning is the real reward, nearly every professor is willing to share the non-rivalrous good of auditing their insights. I audited classes at Harvard, MIT, BU, and Tufts. I also pored over the weekly Harvard Gazette and diligently scanned cork bulletin boards for visitors coming through to give talks. 
- When I moved to Boston (more precisely, Somerville, the working-class town abutting Cambridge), it was in pursuit of the feeling of feeling smart. Belatedly, it's clear what a handicap that posed to developing my own native talent. The ease of snooping on the output of luminaries, who'd won every prize in their field, undercut the crucial process of starting with inchoate thoughts. 
    - It was a mistake to be impressed by their achievement, to only view their ideas when fully-baked, and to have believed that engagement with ideas was a job for fans and spectators. 
- Moving between different campuses in Boston spotlighted how each school groomed their students for a distinct role in society. Harvard's classrooms could resemble little board rooms. MIT's alternative newspaper, The Thistle, once opened the Sept session with the headline "Welcome to Hell".
- In the end, I paid for a Master's at the Harvard Ed School, before going on to complete the 23rd grade at Stanford (for a PhD in experimental psychology).
- Even keeping in mind Descartes' joke that every person believes they possess an abundance of good sense https://www.goodreads.com/quotes/515934-good-sense-is-of-all-things-among-men-the-most, I can't fault the intellectual taste of my own curiosity. 
- Many thinkers who excited me as an undergrad (most significantly, Kahneman & Tversky, who rocked my world when Heuristics & Biases was first published in '83) continued to hold my interest even after I got a chance to suit up. 
    - Even at the height of academic participation, during grad school at Stanford, readers will see that in the big leagues, I was a backup player mostly cheering from the bench. 
- My particular anxiety didn't superficially manifest as the classic Impostor Syndrome. My self-presentation adopted the Scarecrow's bluster, upon receiving a sheepskin from the Wizard of Oz, overly dependent on my voluminous reading as a handy way to sound like I had been thinking. 
- Herb Simon, one of the remarkable minds I met, wrote in his autobiography that an intellectual was somebody who thought that their professors were normal people. My hyper-verbal intellect deflected my insecurity. 
    - I recognized myself in DeLillo's description of the denizens of little Italy: "They said, Who's better than me? ... They knew how to sit there and say that and feel happy." https://www.google.com/books/edition/Underworld/Ug3ArDMHLnQC?hl=en&gbpv=1&dq=who's+better+than+me+intitle:Underworld+inauthor:Don+inauthor:DeLillo&pg=PA207&printsec=frontcover
- Only recently have I realized that my particular form of the Impostor Syndrome arrived in the quietest hours, during the dark of night, as I struggled to put my big ideas on paper. Paralyzed by knowing so much, having read almost everything that wasn't on the syllabus, I felt unable to see what possible contribution needed to be added. 
    - My most recurrent self-insult was to label myself a "high IQ moron." Or that I was a verbose example of Williams Syndrome. Now that GPT-3's spieling paragraphs informed by its billion-parameter model, that has become the go-to deprecation for my trains of thought.
- I'm afraid that even this post, dwelling on the Remarkable Minds I've Met and Pestered, sustains the illusion that dropping all these names will somehow earn me some distinction. Certainly I collected all these encounters motivated in part by the ambition that others' particular genius might infect me. Why record all these anecdotes of big-brained sightings? 
- Fellini coined the term paparazzo to suggest "a buzzing insect, hovering, darting, stinging." On many campuses, at least the ones I've frequented, a questionably sane person shows up so frequently at talks that they're as recognizable as Jimmy Kimmel's "Guillermo." Until I matriculated in '92, I was __that__ guy. (At Stanford in the '90s, the most prominent was Joe Euclid https://www.quora.com/Who-was-Joe-Euclid-and-where-is-he-now) 
- Starting up - the difficulty in Now Habit was first exposed when I became a new father, and Neil Fiore fired me after about $1000 of consultation. Even though that foundered, the $1K formula I bought from him has abided me for 13 years. When I feel humiliated in front of others, I turn about and say "SO?"
- Learning from Albert Ellis could get much more elaboration
    - Emphasizing rational inspection of one's distress, he was spot-on about Low Frustration Tolerance as a huge hindrance
        - His generative capacity to produce slogans and mottos greatly cut through the cloud of self-war:
            - Musturbate! Shoulding on yourself! Fucked up, fallible individuals. 
            - I am not a worm, even when I behave very wormily
        - USA - Unconditional Self acceptance. That deserves deep exploration, since it's tempting to hate one's self in a high minded, ostensibly more objective vantage.
        - Given how difficult the acceptance of self can be, it may be shockingly easier to start at UA - universal acceptance. "I accept the Universe!" (Margaret Fuller)  I doubt the most common response to hearing that echoes Carlyle's, "Gad, she'd better!" 
        - Acceptance may sound like there was a choice in the matter, as if, were something truly to be found wanting, it could be sent back to the kitchen for another try. Universes are scant around here, so it's more plausible that we see ourselves as forced to like it or lump it.
        - Why can we not see that our Self, in so far as it is consciousness of the World, is, for that person, the Universe? There's no view from Nowhere from which we can stand outside to view ourselves. There's no set of values, no moral point of view, that we somehow follow but also find beyond our own subjective perspective.
        - Acceptance of the Universe/Self doesn't imply that we cannot, in the very next instant, work on changing it. If there's some work still to do, refusing to accept the current state is likely to be more of an obstacle than motivator. 
        - If we don't Observe, there's no chance to Orient, i.e., choose our perspective on all that is the case.
        - When our internal voice shouts, This must not stand!, we had better be fully informed about what is actually happening. Even more powerful is to patiently, even if urgently, inquire as to why the situation or self is in this present position. 
        - Given our vulnerability to confirmation bias, we soldier over ourselves, willfully blind to counterbalancing facts. We may use our strength to tear ourselves down, since that self-excoriation may have been necessary to prevent being excluded and ostracized in evolutionary antecedent eras. 
            - Today, we face considerably less fraught danger. In our economic abundance, unemployment and homelessness are usually the harshest consequences that ignominy can heap upon us. Even incarceration on death row doesn't entail the same degree of risk as our hominid ancestors faced in their daily struggle to be accepted by their tribe.
            - There's a movie scene that mirrors the image of a person hating on themselves more vigorously than the crowd could. Mel Brooks' Blazing Saddles shows the actor Clevon Little about to be lynched when suddenly, he puts a gun to his own head, and ventriloquizes that if anyone makes a false move, this cowboy's going to get it. (The scene is marred by the use of the N word, but at the time, it was still possible to invoke that term as a way of remarking on others' racism)
            - Perhaps a more palatable metaphor comes from Munchausen:
            - The Baron and his horse fall into a swamp, and in order to save himself, he pulls himself out of the water by tugging at the hair on his own head. 
        - Since we can't get out of our own heads, it's necessary that we start from where we actually are. If we have just behaved like a Nazi, in every capacity as horrible as Stalin or Mao, the move to be self-accepting is not equivalent to self-excusing. 
        - Instead, that acceptance springs from realism: Here I am, and this instant is when my choices and actions can still possibly matter to improving the situation. No hate or guilt will retract the past.
        - To imitate Albert Ellis's frequent refrain, I'd like to have a better autobio. It'd be NICE if I were to learn that I'm not actually the cause of mass suffering. But that isn't NECESSARY. 
        - I've got to start from this point, no matter how miserably I've screwed up so far.


# Backlinks
## [October 7th, 2020](<October 7th, 2020.md>)
- in my [Autobio 0 Draft](<Autobio 0 Draft.md>),

