- p.455: The Psychology of Human Misjudgments Selections from three of Charlie's talks, combined into one talk never made, after revisions by Charlie in 2005 that included considerable new material.
- p.456:  "Ed Rothschild, always called such a popping-off “**the shoe button complex**” named for the condition of **a family friend who spoke in oracular style on all subjects after becoming dominant in the shoe button business**.""
- p.456:  "My formal psychological knowledge came only from skimming three psychology textbooks about fifteen year ago. I know practically nothing abour any academic psychology later developed."
- p.458: "I had found that **theory was a superpower in helping one get what one wanted**, as I had early discovered in school wherein I had excelled without labor, guided by theory, while **many others, without mastery of theory, failed despite monstrous effort**."
- p.458: "First, I had long looked for insight by immersion in the intense manner counseled by the great algebraist, Jacobi: "**Invert, always invert**." I sought good judgment mostly by collecting instances of bad judgment, then pondering ways to avoid such outcomes. Second, I became so avid a collector of instances of bad judgment that I paid no attention to boundaries between professional territories. After all , **why should I search for some tiny unimportant, hard-to-find new stupidity in my own field when some large, important, easy to find stupidity was just over the fence in the other fellow's professional territory**?"
- p.459: When I finally got to the psychology texts, I was reminded of the observation of Jacob Viner, the great economist, that an academic is like the truffle hound, an animal so trained and bred for one narrow purpose that it is no good at anything else.
- p.460: But academic psychology has some very important merits a longside its defects. I learned this eventually, in the course of general reading, from a book, Influence, aimed at a popular audience, by a distinguished psychology professor, Robert Cialdini, at Arizona State, a very big university.
- p.461: It seems obvious, to me at least, that the human brain must often operate counterproductively just like the ant's, from unavoidable oversimplicity in its mental process, albeit usually in trying to solve problems more difficult than those faced by ants that don't have to design airplanes.
- p.462: Some psychology professors like to demonstrate the inadequacy of contrast-based perception by having students put one hand in a bucket of hot water and one hand in a bucket of cold water. They are then suddenly asked to remove both hands and place them in a single bucket of room temperature water. Now, with both hands in the same water, one hand feels as if it has just been put in cold water and the other hand feels as if it has just been placed in hot water. When one thus sees perception so easily fooled by mere contrast, where a simple temperature gauge would make no error, and realizes that cognition mimics perception in being misled by mere contrast, he is well on the way toward understanding, not only how magicians fool one, but also how life will fool one.
- **One: Reward and Punishment Superresponse Tendency**
- p.464: Ben Franklin: "**If you would persuade, ****appeal to interest and not to reason**." This maxim is a wise guide to a great and simple precaution in life: Never, ever, think about something else when you should be thinking about the power of incentivcs.
- p.464: finally, somebody got the happy thought that it was foolish to pay the night shift by the hour when what the employer wanted was not maximized billable hours of employee service but fault-free. rapid performance of a particular task.
- p.465: Perhaps the most important rule in managememt is, "**Get the incentives right**."
- p.466: In my long life, I have never seen a management consultant's report that didn't end with the same advice: "This problem needs more management consulting services."
- p.466: The general antidotes here are: (1) especially **fear professional advice when it is especially good for the advisor****;** (2) **learn and use the basic elements of your advisor's trade** as you deal with your advisor; and (3) **double check, disbelieve, or replace much of what you're told****,** to the degree that seems appropriate after objective thought.
- p.467:  Patterson, the great evangelist of the cash register, knew that from his own experience. He had a little store, and his employees were stealing him blind, so that he never made any money. Then people sold him a couple of cash registers, and his store went to profit immediately. He promptly closed the store and went into the cash register business, creating what became the mighty National Cash Register Company, one of the glories of its time.
- p.469: A sales force living only on comissions will be much harder to keep moral than one under less rpessure from the compensation arrangement. On the other hand, a purely comissions sales force may well be more efficient per dollar spent. Therefore, difficult decisions involving trade-offs are common in creating compensation arrangements in the sales function.
- p.470: **Dread, and avoid as much you can, rewarding people for what can be easily faked**.
- p.470: Granny's Rule, to be specific, is the requirement that children eat their carrots before they eat dessert.
- p.471: Around the time of Caesar, there was a European tribe that, when the assembly horn blew, always killed the last warrior to reach his assigned place, and no one enjoyed fighting this tribe.
- **Two: Liking/Loving Tendency**
- p.472: One very practical consequence of liking/loving tendency is that it acts as a conditioning device that makes the liker or lover tend (1) to **ignore faults of, and comply with wishes of****, the object of his affection**, (2) to **favor people, products, and actions merely associated**** with the object of his affection**, and (3) to **distort other facts to faciltate ****love**.
- **Three: Disliking/Hating Tendency  **
- p.472: Even with the spread of religion, and the advent of advanced civilization, much modern war remains pretty savage. But we also get what we observe present-day Switzerland and the United States, wherein the clever political arrangements of man "channel" the hatreds and dislikings of individuals and groups into nonlethat patterns including elections.
- p.473: Disliking/Hating tendency also acts as a conditioning device that makes the disliker/hater tend to (1) **ignore virtues**** in the object of dislike**, (2) **dislike people, products, and actions merely associated**** with the object of his dislike**, and (3) **distort other facts**** to facilitate hatred**.
- **Four: Doubt-Avoidance Tendency**
- p.473: The **brain of man is programmed with a ****tendency to quickly remove doubt by reaching some decision**.
- p.474:  **what usually ****triggers**** doubt-avoidance** tendency is some combination of (1) **puzzlement** and (2) **stress**. And both of these factors naturally occur in facing religious issues.
- **Five: Inconsistency-Avoidance Tendency**
- p.474: **Inconsistency Avoidance Tendency makes it ****much easier to prevent a habit than to change it**.
- p.474: Also tending to be maintained in place by the anti-change tendency of the brain are one's previous conclusions, human loyalties, reputational identidy, commitments, accepted role in a civilization, etc.
- p.476: One corollary of Inconsistency-Avoidance Tendency is that **a person making big sacrifices in the course of assuming a new identity will intensify his devotion to the new identity**. After all, it would be quite inconsistent behavior to make a large sacrifice for something that was no good.
- p.477: For instance, modern education often does more damage when young students are taught dubious political notions and then enthusiasticallypush these notions on the rest of us. **The pushing seldom convinces others. But ****as students pound into their mental habits what they are pushing out, the students are often permanently damaged**. Educational institutions that create a climate where much of this goes on are, I think, irresponsible. It is important not to thus put one's brain in chains before one has come anywhere near his full potential as a rational person.
- **Six: Curiosity Tendency**
- **Seven: Kantian Fairness Tendency**
- p.478: it is not too much to say that modern acculturated man displays, and expects from others, a lot of fairness as thus defined by Kant.
- **Eight: Envy/Jealousy Tendency**
- p.479: University communities often go bananas when some university employee in money management, or some professor in surgery, gets annual compensation in multiples of the standard professional salary.
- p.479:  My guess is that people widely and generally sense that labeling some position as driven by envy/jealousy will be regarded as extremely insulting to the position taker, possibly more so when the diagnosis is correct than when it is wrong.
- **Nine: Reciprocation Tendency**
- p.480: The **standard antidote to one's overactive hostility is to ****train oneself to defer reaction**. As my smart friend Tom Murphy so frequently says, "You can always tell the man off tomorrow, if it is such a good idea."
- p.480: Of course, the tendency to reciprocate favor for favor is also very intense, so much so that it occasionally reverses the course of reciprocated hostility. Weird pauses in fighting have sometimes occurred right in the middle of wars, triggered by some minor courtesy or favor on the part of one side, followed by favor reciprocation from the other side, and so on, until fighting stopped for a considerable period.
- p.481: And Reciprocation Tendency, insomuch as it causes good results, does not join forces only with the superpower of incentives. It also joins Inconsistency-Avoidance tendency in helping cause ( I ) the fulfillment of promises made as part of a bargain, including loyalty promises in marriage ceremonies, and (2) correct behavior expected from persons serving as priests, shoemakers, physicians, and all else.
- p.481: The simplest antidote works best: **Don't let them accept any favors from vendors**. Sam Walton agreed with this idea of absolute prohibition. I wouldn't let purchasing agents accept so much as a hot dog from a vendor. Given the subconscious level at which much Reciprocation Tendency operates, this policy of Walton's was profoundly correct. If I controlled the Defense Department, its policies would mimic Walton's.
- p.483: the reciprocity-based, religion-boosting idea of obtaining help from God in reciprocation for good human behavior has probably been mostly constructive.
- **Ten: Influence-from-Mere-Association Tendency**
- p.483:  consider the case of many men who have been trained by their previous experience in life to believe that when several similar items are presented for purchase, the one with the highest price will have the highest quality.
- p.484: **Some of the most ****important miscalculations come from what is accidentally associated with one's past success**, or one's liking and loving, or one's disliking and hating, which includes a natural hatred for bad news.
- p.484: **Think of ****Napoleon and Hitler when they invaded Russia**** after using their armies with much success elsewhere**.
- p.484: The target purchaser of shoe polish may like pretty girls. And so he chooses the polish with the pretty girl on the can or the one with the pretty girl in the last ad for shoe polish that he saw.
- p.484: The proper antidotes to being made such a patsy by past success are (1) to **carefully examine each past success****, looking for accidental, non-causative factors associated with such success** that will tend to mislead as one appraises odds implicit in a proposed new undertaking and (2) to **look for dangerous aspects of the new undertaking** that were not present when past success occurred.
- p.485: Another common bad effect from the mere association of a person and a hated outcome is displayed in "**Persian Messenger Syndrome**." **Ancient Persians actually killed some messengers whose sole fault was that they brought home truthful bad news**, say, of a battle lost. It was actually safer for the messenger to run away and hide, instead of doing his job as a wiser boss would have wanted it done.
- p.485: Franklin counseled: "Keep your eyes wide open before marriage and half shut thereafter." Perhaps this "eyes-half-shut” solution is about right, but I favor a tougher prescription: "See it like it is and love anyway."
- p.486: The proper antidote to creating Persian Messenger Syndrome and its bad effects, like those at CBS, is to develop, through exercise of will, a habit of welcoming bad news. At Berkshire, there is a common injunction: "Always tell us the bad news promptly. It is only the good news chat can wait."
- p.487:  Pete will make many errors, like that of the fellow who drowned in a river that averaged out only eighteen feet deep
- **Eleven: Simple, Pain-Avoiding Psychological Denial**
- p.487: The tendency's most extreme outcomes are usually mixed up with love, death, and chemical dependency.
- **Twelve: Excessive Self-Regard Tendency**
- p.487: **He mostly misappraisals himself on the high side,** like the ninety percent of Swedish drives that judge themselves to be above average.
- p.488: Excess of self-regard typically makes him strongly prefer people like himself.
- p.489:  **Excesses of self regard often cause bad hiring decisions** because employers grossly overpraise the worth of their own conclusions that rely on the impression in face-to-face contact. The correct antidote to this sort of folly is to nderweigh face to face impressions and overweigh the applicant’s past record.
- p.489: According to Tolstoy, the worst criminals don’t appraise themselves as all that bad. They come to believe either (1) that they didn’t commit their crimes or (2) that, considering the pressures and disadvantages of their lives, it is understandable and forgivable that they behaved as they did and became what they became.
- p.490: The main institutional antidote to this part of the "Tolstoy effect" are (1) a fair, meritocratic, demanding culture plus personnel handling methods that build up morale and (2) severance of the worst offenders
- **Thirteen: Overoptimism Tendency**
- p.491: One standard antidote to foolish optimism is trained, habitual use of the simple probability math of Fermat and Pascal, taught in my youth to high school sophomores. **The mental rules of thumb that evolution gives you to deal with risk are no adequate**. They resemble the dysfunctional golf grip you would have if you relied on a grip driven by evolution instead of golf lessons.
- **Fourteen: Deprival-Superreaction Tendency**
- p.491: **The quantity of man's ****pleasure from a ten dollar gain docs not exactly march the quantity of his displeasure from a ten-dollar loss**. That is, the loss seems to hurt much more than the gain seems to help.
- p.491: In displaying Deprival-Superreaction Tendency, man frequently incurs disadvantage by mis-framing his problems. He will often compare what is near instead of what really matters. For instance ,**a man with $10 million in his brokerage account will often be extremely irritated by the accidental loss of $100 out of the $300** in his wallet.
- p.493: Deprival-Superreaction Tendency and Inconsistency-Avoidance Tendency often join to cause one form of business failure. In this form of ruin, a man gradually uses up all his good assets in a fruitless attempt to rescue a big venture going bad.** One of the best antidotes to th is folly is good poker skill learned young**.
- p.494: Some of this reaction is caused by rational calculation, and some is, no doubt, attributable ro some combination of (1) reward superresponse, (2) "status quo bias" from Inconsistency-Avoidance tendency, and (3) "the endowment effect" from Excessive Self-Regard Tendency.
- **Fifteen: Social-Proof Tendency**
- p.495: This makes it **wise for parents to rely more on manipulating the quality of the peers than on the exhortations to their own offspring**.
- p.495: Because both bad and good behavior are made contagious by Social-Proof tendency, **it is ****highly important that human societies**** (I) ****stop any bad behavior**** before it spreads and (2) ****foster and display all good behavior**.
- p.495: when will Sociai-Proof tendency be most easily triggered? Here the answer is clear from many experiments: **Triggering most readily occurs**** in the presence of ****puzzlement or stress****, and particularly when both are high**.
- p.496: In social proof, **it is not only action by others that misleads but also their inaction. ****In the presence of doubt, inaction by others becomes social proof that inaction is the right course**.
- p.497: Learn how to ignore the examples from others when they are wrong. because few skills are more worth having.
- **Sixteen: Contrast-Misreaction Tendency**
- p.497: To make an ordinary price seem low, **the vendor will very frequently ****create a highly artificial price that is much higher than the price always sought, then advertise his standard price as a big reduction**** from his phony price**.
- p.498: One of Ben Franklin's best-remembered and most useful aphorisms is "A small leak will sink a great ship." The utility of the aphorism is large precisely because the brain so often misses the functional equivalent of a small leak in a great ship.
- **Seventeen: Stress-Influence Tendency**
- **Eighteen: Availability-Misweighing Tendency**
- p.500: One consequence of this tendency is that **extravivid evidence****, being so memorable and thus more available in cognition, ****should often consciously be underweight**** while ****less vivid evidence should be overweighed**.
- p.500: Man's imperfect, limited-capacity brain easily drifts into working with what's easily available to it.
- p.500: Still, the special strength of extra-vivid images in influencing the mind can be constructively used (l) in persuading someone else to reach a correct conclusion or (2) as a device for improving one's own memory by attaching vivid images, one after the other, to many items one doesn't want to forget.
- **Nineteen: Use-It-or-Lose-It Tendency**
- p.501: The hard rule of use-it-or-lose-it tendency tempers its harshness for the diligent. **If a ****skill is raised to fluency, instead of merely being crammed in briefly**** to enable one to pass some rest, then the skill (l) ****will be lost more slowly**** and (2) ****will come back faster**** when refreshed with new learning**. These are not minor advantages, and a wise man engaged in learning some important skill will not stop unti l he is really fluent in it.
- **Twenty: Drug-Misinfluence Tendency**
- **Twenty-One: Senescence-Misinfluence Tendency**
- **Twenty-Two: Authority-Misinfluence Tendency**
- p.502: Such cases are also given attention in the simulator training of copilots who have to learn to ignore certain really foolish orders from boss pilots because boss pilots will sometimes err disastrously. Even after going through such arraining regime, however, copilots in simulator exercises will too often allow the simulated plane to crash because of some extreme and perfectly obvious simulated error of the chief pilot.
- p.503: Finally, when it was necessary to put more pressure on the fish by causing more bending of the angler's rod, the guide said in English: "**Give him the rod, give him the rod." well, the angler threw his expensive rod at the fish**, and when last seen, it was going down the Rio Colorado toward the ocean. This example shows how powerful is the tendency to go along with an authority figure and how it can turn one's brain into mush.
- **Twenty-Three: Twaddle Tendency**
- p.504: Man, as a social animal who has the gift of language, is born to prattle and to pour out twaddle that does much damage when serious work is being attempted. Some people produce copious amounts of twaddle and others very little.
- **Twenty-Four: Reason-Respecting Tendency**
- p.504: This tendency has an obvious implication. It makes man especially prone to learn well when a would-be teacher gives correct reasons for what is taught, instead of simply laying out the desired belief ex cathedra with no reasons given. Few practices, therefore, are wise than not only thinking through reasons before giving orders but also communicating these reasons to the recipient of the order.
- p.505: In general, **learning is most easily assimilated and used when, life long, people consistently hang their experience, acrual and vicarious, on a latticework of theory answering the question: Why?** Indeed, the question "why?" is a sort of Rosetta stone opening up the major potenriality of mental life.
- p.505: This has been demonstrated in psychology experiments wherein "compliance practitioners" successfully jump to the head of the line in front of copying machines by explaining the ir reason: "I have to make some copies." This sort of unfortunate byproduct of Reason-Respecting Tendency is a conditioned reflex, based on a widespread appreciation of the importance of reasons.
- **Twenty-Five: Lollapalooza Tendency-The Tendency to Get Extreme Consequences from Confluences of Psychological Tendencies Acting in Favor of a Particular Outcome**
- p.508: The Harvard Business School's emphasis on decision trees. When I was young and foolish I used to laugh at the Harvard Business School. I said, "They're reaching twenty-eightyear-old people that high school algebra works in real life?" But later, I wised up and realized that it was very important that they do that to counter some bad effects from psychological tendencies. Better late than never.
- p.510: I even hope that more psychology professors will join me in: ( I ) making heavy use of inversion; (2) driving for a complete description of the psychological system so that it works better as a checklist; and (3) especially emphasizing effects from combinations of psychological tendencies.
- p.510: My final question is: Aren't there factual and reasoning errors in this talk? The answer is yes, almost surely yes. The final revision was made from memory over about fifty hours by a man eighty-one years old, who never took a course in psychology and has read none of it, except one book on developmental psychology, for nearly fifteen years.
