- Today demands absolute rigor ignoring the doom scroll ball scratch. I spent ayer in Tracy, at Hawkins Elementary & Bohn, to observe the polls. I probably caught the only incident. WeChat lit up a bit to remark on an orange t-shirt at Bohn. Around 1, I drive over, and there were 4 cop cars with cherries flashing. Orange t-shirt said "Bearded & Ugly" with machine guns festooning the text. The dude looked solid, lots of tattoos, and he was calmly telling 2 of the cops about the nuisance surveillance of a guy on the other side of the parking lot, with a white t. Mr Orange was within his rights, standing well off beyond the 100 ft mark, and as far as I could presume, he was just watching the polls. His buddy orbited, in a black t-shirt, lanky and peripherally monitoring the sitch. I video'd. Then, after, he asked his buddy for a water, and I went and gave him the only bottle that I gave away that day. I thanked him for doing his duty. Also, when a cop came over to ask what I was video'ing, I replied that Election Defense was a non-partisan group observing to make sure the laws were fairly enforced. Also, he already had this in hand, and I thanked him for his service.
- Mr Orange, when the cops left, arranged to slip out and have his black friend take over. Mr Black T-shirt was more suspicious, and when I said we all wanted fair elections, he snorted "I wish!" Both guys were at least slightly paranoid, but neither felt threatening. The monitor of the monitor (Mr White) seemed to be more under the law's suspicion. Mr Black was driving a pickup with an American & a Black Flag (the Black & White). Since the pickup was across the street, it was perfectly legal. The flags didn't flare w/o wind, so the Tramp name wasn't visible anyway.
- Elisabeth Kashner pulled me into this, and she later came up around 3.
- I stayed at Bohn until 7ish, w/o anything else of note. 
- Got to talk to Allan Collins, seeking the long-view. I repeated the JSB - Stu Card convo: "Stu, do you read books?" He & Muffy writing on self-regulation, to fight digital addiction. 
