- [journal](<journal.md>){{[POMO](<POMO.md>): 10}}
- Have not been writing in here regularly. Last week I was not paying Lynette to monitor my work, and it coincided with a certain piffling away of energy or focus. Have drawn somewhat more regularly. Exercise is bursty, and Fri's trip in Tilden / Cordonices caused my thighs to burn the next day.
- I have been making progress with R, but not exactly clear about what would trigger a burned Benjamin. The most confusing thing for me is that I need to work on problems on paper to solve them, but everything is set up to be done via PDFs, so my scraps of paper just diffuse. I am enjoying the challenge. Inspired by a remark Balaji S made about just working through Schaum's Problems for various ideas, I got the 4th edition for probability and statistics (but again, as a pdf)
- The week past was OK, without crisp sense of accomplishment. Some of my big wins were very domestic, like yesterday's major attack on the rat hole behind the sink: The wood is so rotted away that there wasn't even a surface to screw in the mesh wiring. I hacked a couple of pieces of lumber into an L, so that the side would hold, and the top, where there's no structural support, would be pressed up to closure w/o any direct screws to hold it.
- Mir and I had a very good conversation on Saturday evening. She came over to tell me that she felt I wasn't at all interested in her. At times, I was defensive, responding about how evasive she can be when I asked where she went, what she's reading, watching, writing, etc. But her point is still to be taken seriously, since in many ways, I've despaired of ever having us know each other intimately, beyond the time tested method of sharing the house and childcare over decades.
    - Her response to my remark about her evasiveness orbited around the chasm between our two norms of disclosure. And since I am much more of an over-sharer, she defends her right to not share anything with her husband, since it risks being repeated outside the house. That may sound sort of crazy, in how I wrote it. But it is how she feels, and if I don't work with it, she will never open up 
- Timeboxing: Incremental steps toward implementation. The on-paper method of Cal Newport
- [ ] Timebox 3 blocks of 45 between now and 1pm
- 
